In this lesson we're going to look at the
count controlled
while loop and I demonstrate how the cont
controlled while loop works.
I'm going to provide two examples.
So let's get started.
We are gonna call this program
'whilecount.py'.
So the first time we are going to do is
a very simple program that sums the first
ten integers.
Starting with one.
So we'll set a variable sum to zero.
Our first number will be one.
And then we'll say while number is less
than or equal to ten.
Followed by a colon to indicate the
beginning of the loop body.
Then we'll say sum is equal to sum plus
number.
And the number is equal to number plus
one.
And at the end we'll say, print the sum
is.
And of course, remember to convert sum to
string to display it.
The counting comes in here where we're
counting up from one to ten.
This is very similar to the example I
showed you in
the first lesson, where we were displaying
the numbers one to ten.
This time the differences were computing
the sum
of these numbers as we move through them.
And again, looking at the steps, we have
to have a relational expression, which we
have.
The main body of the loop, or the
thing that we're trying to get
accomplished is accomplished
in this line, and then we have a
statement which will make the relational
expression become false.
I should also mention that in many of the
while loops that you write, you also need
to have
a statement before the while loop that
ensures that
the while loop will be entered in the
first place.
And that's number equal one.
Or number assigned the value one, make
sure that this expression is true
the first time in, so that the body of the
loop will be executed.
For example, if we'd written 11 here
instead of one.
Then the very first time the relational
expression is tested, it
would be false and we would never even get
into the body.
So, always ensure that at the beginning of
the first
iteration of the loop, in other words, the
first time
the loop is going to be run, or the body's
going to be executed, that the relational
expression will be true.
So let's exit and save,
and then let's execute the program, and
we'll see that the sum is 55.
One plus two, plus three, plus four, plus
five, plus
six, plus seven, plus eight, plus nine,
plus ten is 55.
So let's look at another example.
We'll use the same program.
What I'll do is, I'll comment out the
lines that we've already used.
I haven't talked about comments in the
course so far.
A comment is simply a line that the python
interpreter ignores but that the human can
look at.
So for example, if I wanted to put a
comment at the beginning of this program.
It said something like examples of
count-control loops.
Then the compiler ignores this.
And moves on to the first executable line.
So any line that begins with the pound
sign
is considered a comment and the compiler
ignores it.
Comments can also go at the end of a line.
But we'll look at those later when the
occasion arises to use one.
So let's look at another example of
account control
loop, this time we'll do one a little bit
differently.
This time, we're going to look at how to
compute some simple interest on a savings
account, for example.
So we're gonna set up a balance variable,
and a rate variable,
and a year variable, and we want to see
is, how much.
The balance will increase, growing at a
simple
interest of 2% per year, for ten years.
So we'll say while year is less than or
equal to ten, compute the
new balance and then just for fun, we'll
look at the balance through the years.
And then we'll display the balance at the
end of that line.
Close off the print, and then we have to
increment years so that the while loop
will eventually stop.
And we'll see the ending balance at the
end, so we don't need to print it again.
So let's review what we're doing here.
We have a balance variable and a right
variable and a year variable.
We're saying while the year is less than
or equal to ten, compute the new balance,
display, and then increment year by one so
that this relational expression.
Will eventually become false.
Let's exit and save,
clear our screen here, and then run the
program, and there's the result.
Later in the course I'll show you how to
clean
up this output so that we don't see all
these.
Fairly insignificant decimal places.
So you can see how a account will grow
just based on simple interest over ten
years at 2%.
So 5,000 will grow to 6,000 essentially,
$6, 095.
So that wraps up this lesson
on count-controlled loops, and now we're
ready
to move to the next type of loop, and
that's the event-controlled loop.